---
title: "23"
---

I'm 23. I have the added benefit that my age corresponds to the new year (except for the two weeks between my birthday and the start of the new year). It's a perfectly meaningless symmetry that I will exploit to help me begin a yearly review. 

"Review" has a yucky, evaluative connotation. I use it more literally. To *re*-view the experiences that have shaped me during my year. I want to re-cast them, yes, by reducing them into digestible lessons. As a critical historian doing history for the future. 

22 — the age — began with covid. The cold and stressful finals season at Columbia is a cesspool of sickness. With the omicron wave in full swell in December 2022, everyone I knew had it or was isolated because of exposure. I celebrated my 22nd birthday, quarantined in my room. Thankfully, it turned out to be quite a mild case. Right after I tested negative, I bought a last-minute, cheap flight to Mexico on the morning of the 30th. By the evening, I joined my sister and her boyfriend in a hostel in Sayulita, Mexico, to celebrate the new year. 

'22 — the year — began on the beach with meet in the water and blaring house music. Surrounded by sea, people, music — life — it felt healing. It was an incredible contrast to the cold, anxious, and slightly depressing few weeks. With the cool wash of the ocean between my toes, the coarse sand beneath my feet grounding me, and my eyes closed, the year of COVID flashed by. I smiled at the contingency. Sure, it could've been so much better, I thought. But with the with the ocean breeze, I thought, it could've been so much worse. I smiled. 

People loving the mere fact of being around people. I could feel it in the air. We truly are crazy creatures. We need people. Yet are tortured by their gaze. In typical tortured existentialist fashion, Sartre's pithy "hell is other people." 

While a wild party for New Year, filled with several music options from live rock and reggae to deep techno thundered
night after night in Sayulita, after a hangover and a missed morning surfing too many (on the 3rd) I am reminded that while I love the shared expereince of live music, late nights and hangovers at the expense of early morning walking, nature reading and activity are not worth it. 

I parted ways with my more party-oriented travelling partners, and after some i few reddit trails and ended up 

I felt more connected to the people and place. 

February:
- Starting the semester - the Iron Ma

March/April/May/June: 
- Finding internship
- Iron man - pre-pone trip to Berlin
- A little poem that motivated me:

June, July, August:
- Berlin - first job

September, October, December: 
- Senior Year - First Semester
- 6 classes discovery of dance

November:
- Human Animal Experience - 

December: 
I ended finals more relaxed than ever. Crushing my exams but not writing as well as I would've liked. 

I spent my 23rd birthday with people who I love. I 


**Travel - For People and Process**
To not take for granted to the incredibility of travel. It is truly one of those absurd things. We all congregate to the airport. Check-in, security, killing time before the boarding call, then we get into a huge metal bird, that if weren't so precisley understood in terms of its form and function, we would regard as magic to traverse a distance which only a 100 years ago would've taken months, and  200 years ago would be unthinkable. I have been lucky this year to travel quite a bit. Berlin for three months for a summer internship in the summer, Colorado for a workshop with StrengthSide, India for the end of the year. 

I have come to love to ritual of it. The packing, the nagging feeling that you've forgetten something (which you certainly have), the lightness of holding all that will sustain your existence on your back. Even the more annoying parts. The bawling babies, bored flight attendents, and stern security who shout out the peculier rules of their particular security check. Laptops in or out of the bag, shoes on or off you truly never know. I've come to love it. When travel, the actual process of moving thorugh space, isn't reduced to a minimization problem in time and effort to get from point A to B, it is a wierdly bonding experience. Because everyone is going through it. Its always fun to find the people who find the humor in it. 

Don't get me wrong, where and why you travel matters. But I've come to apprecaite the how of travel. Taking a train to the South of Germany, a ferry across Lake Konstanz, or a cramped sea plane, every modality brings with it a slightly different social dynamic. 
